feat: add notam for A380X native 2024 release (#549)
flybywiresim/flybywiresim-website: src/posts/development-update-native-msfs-2024-a380x.md

Today, we are excited to announce a monumental leap forward. Microsoft Flight Simulator 2024 opened up a brand-new frontier of technology, and our team has been working hard to learn what new technologies MSFS2024 brings to the table and to push it to its absolute limits. Following our recent transition to simulator-specific development branches, we are thrilled to share the next major milestone for FlyByWire Simulations: the first native MSFS 2024 release of the A380X.

![](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-02.jpg)

> Unlocking the native capabilities of the Microsoft Flight Simulator 2024 platform allows us to take this promise a step further, maximizing both visual immersion and system performance without compromising on fidelity. And the open source nature of our developments fosters collaboration and co-learning of how to develop for this next-generation simulation platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlocking the native capabilities of the Microsoft Flight Simulator 2024 platform allows us to take this promise a step further, maximizing both visual immersion and system performance without compromising on fidelity. Moreover, the open source nature of our developments fosters collaboration and co-learning of how to develop for this next-generation simulation platform.
```

Starting a sentence with `and` is a little weird IMO

Our first practical use case for this modular architecture is the introduction of a dedicated No Cabin variant. For users running resource-limited setups, this variant entirely removes the heavy interior cabin geometry to save performance. To ensure external visual fidelity remains intact, we have integrated parallax window textures. This means that when viewing the aircraft from the outside, you will still see a convincing, realistic interior depth through the windows, entirely eliminating the "hollow shell" look of traditional cabinless models. The detail in these parallax windows were taken a step further to reflect the cabin layout of the aircraft. Peek through a window of the first class cabin and see how the luxurious first class cabin compares to the economy class on the lower deck.

![](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-03.jpg)
![](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-04.jpg)

> The "No Cabin" variant is just the first step. This modular framework lays the foundation for future customizations and variants that we have planned to introduce down the line. The next photo should give you a guess of what is the variant that we’re shipping next!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "No Cabin" variant is just the first step. This modular framework lays the foundation for future customizations and variants that we have planned to introduce down the line. The next photo should give you a guess of which variant it is that we’re shipping next!
```

![](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-05.jpg)

## Performance Optimization: VRAM and Frame Rate Gains

> One of our primary goals with this native port was ensuring that the A380X runs smoothly across a broader range of hardware configurations. We have heard your voices of wanting more performance out of this massive beast of an aircraft and we have worked hard over the past year to try and integrate as much as we can in this first phase of the MSFS2024 native release. Thanks to the optimizations available in MSFS2024 and a highly optimized implementation of Level of Detail (LOD) models, users will see substantial performance improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of our primary goals with this native port was to ensure that the A380X runs smoothly across a broader range of hardware configurations. We have heard your voices of wanting more performance out of this massive beast of an aircraft and we have worked hard over the past year to try and integrate as much as we can in this first phase of the MSFS2024 native release. Thanks to the optimizations available in MSFS2024 and a highly optimized implementation of Level of Detail (LOD) models, users will see substantial performance improvements.
```

We have used a combination of techniques to optimise the aircraft for lower end machines. More mipmaps are used now to benefit from the sim’s texture management system so no texture resolution mods are required anymore. The appropriate texture resolution will be loaded based on your sim’s texture resolution setting for improved VRAM management. Great care was also taken to ensure the aircraft still looks great so you get the same visual fidelity as before.

Our internal testing shows an impressive reduction in VRAM utilization alongside noticeable frame rate increases, bringing highly welcome relief to lower-spec systems. Lower spec systems using lower settings in the sim have been reported to gain up to 1 - 2GB of VRAM usage reduction and up to 50% increase in FPS. Higher end systems running higher sim settings might not see as huge a reduction statistically but have all reported a significantly smoother experience when using the aircraft even in heavy sceneries.

> Please note that our current LOD implementation is an initial foundation. Over the coming updates, we will continue refining the LOD system to further enhance draw distances, optimize asset transitions, squeeze out even more performance, and to reduce VRAM usage further.The 2024 LOD system is something that our developers are continuously learning and experimenting with over the past year, creating new artwork while diving deeper into the SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that our current LOD implementation is an initial foundation. Over the coming updates, we will continue to refine the LOD system to further enhance draw distances, optimize asset transitions, squeeze out even more performance, and to reduce VRAM usage further.The 2024 LOD system is something that our developers are continuously learning and have been experimenting with over the past year, creating new artwork while diving deeper into the SDK.
```

### Modular Cabin and Layouts

The A380 cabin is still in the process of being fully converted to the MSFS2024 modular system. This means there is room for performance gains to be achieved in the upcoming updates as the modular cabin is finished. We have some exciting implementations that we are experimenting with to push the boundaries of the modular cabin both visually and in performance optimizations.

## How can you help?

The FlyByWire development process is an open, volunteer community driven ecosystem. Our progress is solely driven by volunteer contributions and community focused development. If there is a feature that you would like to help add to any of the aircraft, anyone can jump in and contribute to the development of that feature. We have channels on our discord for the community to discuss and gain guidance on how to develop for MSFS. Everyone in the team started our journey in a similar fashion, taking a small curiosity in fixing something small and diving deeper into the rabbit hole after.

> If development isn’t something you’re after, we are always looking for more volunteers to join our quality assurance, community support, and the media team. You can ask for more information on our discord and one of our team members can help you out with more information. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If development isn’t something you’re after, we are always looking for more volunteers to join our quality assurance, community support, and the media team. You can ask for more information on our discord and one of our team members will be happy to provide you with everything you need to know. 
```
Double more information

## Closing

The native MSFS 2024 A380X represents an immense amount of work from our global team of volunteers and it is a milestone that we are very proud of achieving. Along with the sim-specific development split from our last NOTAM, we are now able to fully utilise MSFS2024 specific features in our development cycles. By delivering a modular, highly optimized aircraft architecture, we are thrilled to offer an aircraft that performs beautifully while opening the door for future innovation.

We want to thank you for your incredible support, patience, and feedback. We look forward to seeing the A380X take to the skies in MSFS 2024!

---

## FAQ

**When will feature XYZ come?**

> As the development of the FlyByWire projects is community-driven, we do not enforce delivery timelines on our volunteer developers. We value high-quality, polished releases over frequent and quickly-released ones, which means some features might take time to land in a publicly-available build. Rest assured that our developers and contributors are working hard on making every FlyByWire project as bug-free and feature-complete as possible, but that we are not able to provide release dates or estimates for a certain feature/fix. We encourage community contributions for developing new features too so everyone in the community can benefit from the community work. If there is a feature that you would like to see added to the project more quickly, don’t be afraid to ask for help to learn how to start developing it in our discord.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the development of the FlyByWire projects is community-driven, we do not enforce delivery timelines on our volunteer developers. We value high-quality, polished releases over frequent and quickly-released ones, which means some features might take time to land in a publicly-available build. Rest assured that our developers and contributors are working hard on making every FlyByWire project as bug-free and feature-complete as possible, but that we are not able to provide release dates or estimates for a certain feature/fix. We encourage community contributions to develop new features too so everyone in the community can benefit from the community work. If there is a feature that you would like to see added to the project more quickly, don’t be afraid to ask for help to learn how to start developing it in our discord.
```

This initial release focuses squarely on the core native port and its performance optimizations. Consequently, walkaround mode external panels are not yet included. Features using the MSFS2024 walkaround mode are still being planned and evaluated, and they will be rolled out in a subsequent phase once this core release has completely stabilized.

**I am still getting performance issues with the A380X after updating my aircraft. What can I do?**

The A380 is an extremely large aircraft which means it uses more texture space to cover the aircraft for the same texture detail when compared to other addons. With our current development of the native 2024 modularisation, we have taken steps to optimise the VRAM usage for lower spec systems first and are progressively optimising the entire aircraft further. If you are facing performance issues, we strongly recommend using the “no cabin” variant of the A380X to minimise the resources needed to run the aircraft and to try using the recommendations in the recommended settings section to tune your simulator settings for a better experience.

**What other features are currently in development?**

> As our development happens openly on Github, you can browse the [Github repository](https://github.com/flybywiresim/aircraft) to see what features are currently being worked on by the community. It can be useful to contribute references to a relevant development if you have access to them. Discussion for development primarily happens on discord but can also take place on Github. Some useful starting points are to browse the pull requests for in-development progress and the issue tracker for reported bugs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As our development happens openly on Github, you can browse the [Github repository](https://github.com/flybywiresim/aircraft) to see what features are currently being worked on by the community. It can be useful to contribute references to a relevant development, if you have any. Discussion for development primarily happens on discord but can also take place on Github. Some useful starting points are to browse the pull requests for in-development progress and the issue tracker for reported bugs.
```
I'd rather avoid mentioning not publicly available references

**How do I report a bug or submit a feature request?**

> All bugs and feature requests are reported on the issue tracker on Github so any contributor can see it and choose to start working on it. You can see the list of existing issues on our [issue tracker](https://github.com/flybywiresim/aircraft/issues) and submit a new issue for a bug or feature request by opening a new issue. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All bugs and feature requests are reported on the issue tracker on Github so any contributor can see it and choose to start working on it. You can see the list of existing issues on our [issue tracker](https://github.com/flybywiresim/aircraft/issues) and submit bug reports or feature request by opening a new issue. 
```
Double issue

[![](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-03.jpg)](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-03.jpg)
[![](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-04.jpg)](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-04.jpg)

You can select the "No Cabin" variant on the aircraft selection menu as seen in the screenshot below. You will see options for "No Cabin" and "Standard" as current available variants and the same liveries can be used for both variants of the A380X.

[![](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-07.jpg)](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-07.jpg)

> The "No Cabin" variant is just the first step. This modular framework lays the foundation for future customizations and variants that we have planned to introduce down the line. The next photo should give you a _clear_ idea of which variant it is that we’re shipping next!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The "No Cabin" variant is just the first step. This modular framework lays the foundation for future customizations and variants that we have planned to introduce down the line. The next photo should give you a _clear_ idea of which variant we’re shipping next!
```

---
title: 'Development Update: Introducing the Native MSFS 2024 A380X'

> date: '2026-06-25'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date: '2026-06-27'
```

### Addressing GPU Out of Memory Issues

VRAM exhaustion is a common occurance in MSFS2024 due to the increased VRAM requirements of the sim. As the A380 is an aircraft that is physically much larger than any other aircraft, this results in requiring much more texture space to wrap around the model with a similar texel density. Consider if you had to gift wrap an A380, you would need more rolls of wrapping paper compared to wrapping an A320. This is the same as texture space where larger aircraft simply need larger amount of textures, which leads to more memory consumed. This can be a big problem for GPUs with limited VRAM such as 8GB cards. As such, a lot of our development was initially done on a AMD Ryzen 5 5600X CPU with a RTX 3070 8GB GPU to ensure the aircraft performs decently on a limited VRAM situation, using reasonable sim settings to balance between visual fidelty and simulator performance.

[![](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-15.jpg)](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-15.jpg)

> In our benchmarks of the A380X, we recorded tests of the A380X with a medium/high range of settings at an airport scenery with a heavier demand on resources. The freeware Gatwick airport (EGKK) scenery by mkvy was used in this situation to simulate a realistic heavy load on the simulator. We don't recommend using these settings on a regular basis but we wanted to prove there was headroom available in difficult situations.Terrain LOD and Object LOD was set to 100, dynamic settings was disabled, raytraced shadows was enabled, TAA was used for anti-aliasing, and no frame gen was used in our benchmarking.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In our benchmarks of the A380X, we recorded tests of the A380X with a medium/high range of settings at an airport scenery with a heavier demand on resources. The freeware Gatwick airport (EGKK) scenery by mkvy was used in this situation to simulate a realistic heavy load on the simulator. We don't recommend using these settings on a regular basis but we wanted to prove there was headroom available in difficult situations. Terrain LOD and Object LOD was set to 100, dynamic settings was disabled, raytraced shadows was enabled, TAA was used for anti-aliasing, and no frame gen was used in our benchmarking.
```
Missing Space

As seen in the benchmarks shown below, both the native 2024 standard and no cabin variants have a reduced VRAM footprint putting the simulator out of the VRAM exhaustion that the dev build would have been in. The dev build was maxing out the available VRAM and resulted in an unusable average framerate of 10fps, with a wildly unstable frame time. Both native 2024 variants resulted in a 400% increase in fps due to the 1-2GB VRAM usage reduction in this new build. We strongly encourage users with 8GB and even 12GB VRAM to consider using medium texture resolutions to maximise the VRAM gains from MSFS2024. Adding on the use of the No Cabin variant can further reduce the VRAM required, leaving more overhead for scenery before your GPU runs out of memory.

[![](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-12.png)](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-12.png)
[![](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-13.png)](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-13.png)
[![](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-14.png)](/img/notam-images/native-2024-a380x/a380x-native-14.png)

### General Framerate Gains

> Our internal testing shows an impressive reduction in VRAM utilization alongside noticeable frame rate increases, bringing highly welcome relief to lower-spec systems. Lower spec systems using lower settings in the sim have been reported to gain up to 1 - 2GB of VRAM usage reduction and some users even reporting up to 50% increase in FPS on their usual settings. Higher end systems running higher sim settings might not see as large a reduction statistically but have all reported a significantly smoother experience when using the aircraft even in heavy sceneries. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Our internal testing shows an impressive reduction in VRAM utilization alongside noticeable frame rate increases, bringing highly welcome relief to lower-spec systems. Lower spec systems using lower settings in the sim have been reported to see up to 1 - 2GB of VRAM usage reduction and some users even reporting up to 50% increase in FPS on their usual settings. Higher end systems running higher sim settings might not see as large a reduction statistically but have all reported a significantly smoother experience when using the aircraft even in heavy sceneries. 
```
"gain ... reduction" is a weird phrasing

As the MSFS2024 native A380X uses a different texture format and aircraft structure, all currently available liveries are not compatible with the aircraft until the livery has been repackaged for 2024. Some minor touchups in the liveries might be required where the window plugs were added to the fuselage. There are currently no other changes to the UV layout of the textures, only a conversion to KTX2 and a repackaging of the livery is required to make a livery compatible.  During the rebuilding of the A380X for MSFS2024, we cleaned up the names of the texture files as there were some inconsistencies in the filenames. We will be providing livery makers the full list of file name changes to assist in their repackaging process. We will also provide a sample livery package so liveries can be packaged to display a single aircraft entry in the MSFS2024 aircraft selection menu and for liveries to show up in both variants of the A380X. You can download the [A380X Native 2024 Livery Creator Package](https://flybywirecdn.com/addons/a380x/paintkit/A380X_Native_2024_Livery_Package_v1.1.zip) and [A380X PSD Paintkit](https://flybywirecdn.com/addons/a380x/paintkit/A380X_PAINTKIT_v0.3.rar) here.

> ## What is coming next?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## What is coming next?

```
Needs a newline after a header
